This is an interview with Lonnie Doggett by Ruth
Ann Kirtland on December the 5th at Giddings,
Texas, concerning his tour of duty in Vietnam and
his feelings about Vietnam, the Vietnam War. In
the interest of accumulating knowledge, I am
asking him to donate this tape to me or to the Texas
A&M oral history collection in the university
archives. And he has agreed to this. Have you not?
Yes. Could you tell me where you were born and what
your birth date is? I was born in Ballinger, Texas
on August 31, 1944.
And what's your education? Two years of college at
Angelo State University. And what was your degree
you were pursuing? Agricultural. And what's your
profession now? My profession is I'm a drilling
fluids engineer.
Have you been in the oil business very long? About
12 years. That's long. It's quite long. Okay, what
branch of the service were you in? United States
Air Force. And how long were you in the United
States Air Force? Four years. What rank were you in
the Air Force? I was a buck sergeant. Air Force?
Mm-hmm. What did you do in the Air Force? I was a
military policeman. Isn't that called a security
policeman? Security policeman. Is that what they
called them then, or...? Well, they still call
them that. They're all military police. They're
security police in the Air Force. Mm-hmm. Were you
on the security side or the defense side, or didn't
they have them separated? No, they didn't have
them separated. Okay. What year did you go to
Vietnam? I went in December of 1966. And how long
were you there? A year. The normal tour, did it?
Mm-hmm. Could you tell me briefly what your duties
were as a security policeman? We were assigned to
protect a base in South Vietnam. It was our duty to
protect that base, which was Ponsonute Air Force
Base, and we were assigned to protect it. Did you
have any contact with the Arvin while you were
there? Could you give me your opinion of the
effectiveness of the Arvin or whether they were
ineffective? The Arvin was, they were effective
with what they had. They were very effective. You
know, I don't know just exactly what you're
saying, but the effectiveness that they had, I
mean, they could do with whatever they had. They
could do with modern weapons. They could do with
primitive weapons and do a good job. Well, when
they sent the advisors over to Vietnam, they were
supposed to be training the Arvin, is the way I
understand it. And this is why I ask you the
question, if they were affected, did the training
do them any good, or do you feel that it was just
their natural talents, the natural ability that
they had as Vietnamese in the country. You're
talking basically about the South Vietnamese
soldiers. Yes. We were fighting the North
Vietnamese. Right. Well, the South Vietnamese
were basically good soldiers, but they didn't
have the discipline that American soldiers had,
and that caused them a lot of times to fail in what
they did. Could you expand on that a little?
Discipline by meaning American troops or
American forces in the past have had so much
discipline. Even in Vietnam, even though you're
in a wartime situation, the discipline still is
expressed in every phase, all the way down to
you're still supposed to wear a uniform, right?
That's right. Different things like that. And
you're still policed. You're still told how to act
and how to do. And the RVAN didn't really have the
discipline that we had. And I think that's the
reason American forces are as good fighters as
they are, is because of the discipline that they
had. They recognized leadership. And the RVAN
didn't recognize leadership as much as, they just
weren't as good a soldier as the American
soldiers. Did you come in contact with any of the
helicopter pilots? Oh, yeah. Yes. Did you happen
to meet any of the Arvin helicopter pilots? No.
Just American helicopter pilots. What was your
feelings about the American helicopter pilots
and where they did their job? I thought they were
unbelievably good. They were outstanding. Did
you go out into combat, or did you just stay at the
Air Force base there? No, we were involved in
combat. Another thing, too, you know, that people
don't seem to understand, in Vietnam there's no
such thing as going to the front. There was no
front. I mean, if you were on Vietnamese soil, you
were in a combat zone. It didn't make any
difference if you was in the streets in Saigon or if
you were in the jungles around Tui Hoa or
somewhere. You were in a combat zone in every
situation. You were never out of a combat zone if
you were in Vietnam. So, you know, like us, even
though we were on a base, we had 26 miles of
perimeter to cover. Over half of that perimeter
was in the jungle. So, you know, you could be inside
the base and not be in a safe situation. In the first
place, the base belonged to the Vietnamese. It
didn't belong to the Americans. So we were just
visitors there. We were. When we landed in
Vietnam, as soon as we got off the aircraft, we were
told that we were guests in Vietnam and remember
that we were guests. Why do you think they told you
that? I don't know. They didn't explain it. They
just said that. They just told us. They said that
too. It meant what they, you know, what it implied,
that we were guests. Did the Air Force ever go out
into the fields? Sure.
The Air Force probably has maybe not as many combat
troops as the others. But the military, one thing,
your role in Vietnam didn't mean whatever you were
trained for in the United States didn't mean that
that's what you were going to do while you were in
Vietnam. If you were at FUCAT or TUIWA and you were
in the Air Force Security Police, your job was to
set up ambushes outside the perimeter. A job you
really wasn't trained to do, but a lot of people
wasn't trained to do a lot of things they did. All of
us in the Security Police went to combat school
before we went overseas, but you were involved
Like I said, we protected the base where we were at.
There was no one at us, just us. And so we were
charged with providing security for the
perimeter. We were to protect it against all
aggression or whatever it was or wherever it came.
So you ought to be, and also we had to cover things
that happened, aerial accidents in the jungle and
that sort of thing. Those were, we were charged
with covering those. What do you mean by charged
with? It was your duty. You were called upon to do
it. What did this consist of? Well, for instance,
one time we had an F-4 Phantom and another
Australian aircraft that collided in midair and
they crashed in the jungle. Those aircraft had to
be secured to keep the enemy from taking what was on
and off. So they took like a hundred of us and sent us
into the jungle to secure that... that crash sign
until they got off what they wanted off of them.
That particular one, they would pick so many men to
go and you went and you were given You know, you took
whatever weapons you were supposed to. Some
people had machine gun M60s, some people had
grenade launchers, some people had M16s. And you
went into that area and we stayed two or three days
in max. And, you know, at that time, in that
particular one, it was during the monsoons, so the
rains were heavy. You were in the rice paddies. So
you secured a, you know, it was pitch dark because
of the rain and the air support that you were
supposed to have that dropped illumination
flares at night to light up the area never showed.
And so you lay out there on the dikes and the rice
paddies and try to protect that grass side. The
only problem is, is the Vietnamese, the village
where we were at, Those people knew they hated us.
And because they knew when we left, the VC would
come in and kill them all. If we commandeered the
barns and whatnot, the radio setups and whatnot.
Well, why did they know? Why would the VC come in and
kill them in the village because you had been
there? Because Americans had been there. Is this
standard? Sure. Who ordered it? The VC did it? Did
that mean that the people did not want to cooperate
with you? Oh, yeah. They didn't want us there at
all. But we didn't have any choice. We had to be
there. I mean, what a crash site there. It had to be
taken care of. How did you feel about this? Well, I
didn't want people to be slaughtered, but I think
we should have been there. I think we had to be
there. Were you in any other villages in the course
of your duties? I was in other villages, not for the
same thing. Traveling through them, taking
prisoners through them. Did they get
slaughtered, killed by the V.C. after they went in
there? No. It was just because of that crash of the
Phantom? Yeah. Most of them were... Villages like
that were jungle villages, you know, out off of the
roads and stuff. Small villages with a small
amount of people. But the V.C. would always, you
know, if they came in after us. But you knew they did
because they watched you all the time you were
there. How did you feel about knowing that they
were watching you all the time? Well, it's not a
good feeling, but, you know, it's something to
begin with. You know, when you arrive in Vietnam,
or when I did, You know, you see all the movies and
you read all the books about war, but it's not the
same as when you really get there. And when you
really get there, when I got there, you know,
you're afraid. You're really scared for your
life. You feel like that you, you know, you may die.
Then you're, you know, you're really scared for
probably like a couple of months. And then after
that couple of months, then you're not afraid
anymore. You're afraid, but they've been
bothering you anymore. So you learn to accept, you
know, the environment. Just like, I guess, going
to a new job or something. After a while, you get to
where you kind of just grow something, you know.
And the war did that. And then when You got close to
going home, you started getting scared again
because you knew you were going back home. So the
reality of losing your life came back. You worried
about something happening to you before you got
the chance to go back home. How did you feel about
the Vietnamese one, the South Vietnamese? I had a
very poor opinion of the Vietnamese, the South
Vietnamese. Low opinion. In what way? Well, in the
first place, we were not treated. Security
policemen had a five piastre bounty on them. If you
kill a security policeman, then you got five
dollars. Oh. So, you know, the bounty on the
security police, you know, we weren't real
important when we got down to it. But, you know, a
pilot had a bounty on him. An officer had a bounty on
him. And the South Vietnamese didn't treat us real
well at all. We worked jointly with the QCs, which
were the Quang Cong, and that was Premier Ky's
number one people. They were Vietnamese military
policemen. These were the trainings, weren't
they, that came in the United States at Michigan
State, I believe? Well, I don't know. They were a
training in the United States. They were Quang
Cong. They were killers. They were ruthless.
Every evening, we worked at night all the time. And
every night when we went on duty at guard mount,
they would give us a security or intelligence
report and tell us what the conditions of the
perimeter was if we were in a grade two possible
attack or whatever. The one thing that they always
told us, if we were to come under attack, to make
sure that the Quanton were in front of us and never
got behind us, because they couldn't be trusted.
In other words, they were saying that the
Quanton... They would shoot you. That they would
shoot you? Yeah. So... Why do you think they would
do that? Because some of them were loyal to the
NARC. Even though they were accused people, they
were loyal to the NARC. There was lots of people
that were loyal to the NARC. This must have been
very frustrating, not being able to tell who was
North and who was South, because they all looked
alike. Half of the guys that we worked with, the
Vietnamese military police, were born in Hanoi.
They weren't even from the South. They were
brought down by the... The families were still
living in Hanoi, in the north. So, you know, it made
you kind of edgy when you were with these guys. A lot
of times, They had a Vietnamese workforce that
came in at night, like at 10 or 11 o'clock at night,
maybe a little later. And they were unloaded at the
gate, and all of them had come in and worked through
the night, civilians. We could tell when we were
going to be hit because those people wouldn't show
up. They all knew when we were going to be attacked.
Wouldn't that have been an advantage to the
Americans? knowing that. The only problem is,
instead of knowing it 24 hours ahead of time, you
knew it maybe two hours ahead of time. Well, did the
officers act on this once they realized it, or did
they just ignore it? Oh, yeah, we always prepared.
Well, I'm talking about the officers. The
officers, you know, they're the bosses. And
there's been a lot of talk about the colonels, that
people were out there working on careerism. Do you
understand what I mean when I say careerism? Sure.
Did you find that... I saw officers get decorated
for things that never happened. You know, that
was... I mean, I didn't see it all the time, but it
happened real frequent. In one instance, I saw a
major get decorated for killing an enemy that a
friend of mine killed. And he didn't get in. He got a
purple heart. But he didn't get any credit for the
kills, but the major did. You know, things like
that happen. But the way... A lot of times if there
was, like I was saying about the attack, if there
was an attack, the QCs would know, but they
wouldn't tell us. And they would be running around
everywhere. That's the way we'd know. They'd be
excited and nervous and trying to prepare, and we
would know something was up. Well, didn't it occur
to the officers after a little while that when
those people didn't show up at 10 o'clock that
there might be something? Oh, yeah, we all knew
that. As soon as we saw it, we'd notify
headquarters. Immediately we'd go into combat
preparation and be ready for anything. What did
your combat readiness consist of? That would mean
deploying troops on the perimeters, covering
air, our important areas covering those making
sure that we were protected and all which we were
usually anyway what were you protected with what
kind of equipment what kind of conventional
weapons conventional weapons and these ones i've
heard they weren't too too successful against the
dc well yeah our weapons were affected the m16 The
M60, I don't think there was any better machine gun
than the M60 machine gun. So they really were
effective against them. Weapons, yeah, they
were effective. You could do a real nice job with an
M60 machine gun, an M16. Now, we had problems with
them to begin with. The M16 was bad about jamming.
The only problem with that is the M16, you can't
unjam an M16 like you can a bolt-action rifle. A
regular bolt-action rifle, you can take your
knife out or something and pull the case out of the
barrel. You can't do that on the M16. So what'd you
do? You threw it away. Threw the weapon away. Threw
it away or got you another one or whatever you had to
do. So they started issuing rods with them. It was
kind of primitive. But it was nice to have if you
needed to get a gun. So they issued rods with them,
and then we had some more problems with them. But
all in all, it was an ammunition problem, and it
was, I think, somewhat taken care of. First M16 I
had when I was there jammed a lot, and then I traded
it for another M16, and I got good results out of it.
Sometimes you just get a bad one. When did you get
the jungle boots issued to you? When I got there. So
they did have them when you got there? We got issued
a set of jungle boots, but we couldn't get fatigues
or jungle fatigues they didn't have. They didn't
have the camming? Well, we were supposed to have
them, but they didn't have them. The only thing is
you could go to the black market in Saigon and buy
anything you wanted to. We couldn't even get
ponchos for the monsoon, reindeer. You couldn't
buy underwear. You couldn't buy it. It was
supposed to be issued. You had to ask, you know, if
you needed things like that, you rode home and
someone would send you whatever you needed. Are
you saying that they didn't even have any ponchos
that you had to buy them on the black market? Right.
How much did they cost you on them? It just depended
on where and who you bought them from.
Approximately. Well, you could buy one for $20.
American money, no doubt. No. See, you weren't
allowed American money in Vietnam. You only had
military pay certificates. If you got caught with
American money, you went to jail. Why was this? to
protect the currency in the United States, not
have it depreciated. Go ahead. So they had the
camouflage fatigues there on the black market,
but the United States government did not have an
issue to you at that time. This was in 1966. You
could get anything, military, lots of things, on
the black market that you couldn't get from our
suppliers. Well, they didn't even have them in the
United States at that time for the military, for
the security police. They didn't have them until
later on. See, even Jeeps. For the first six
months, we ate sea rations. That's all we had to
eat. I lost 40 pounds in six months when I got there.
I wasn't hungry, but, you know, didn't have
anything to eat. We ate sea rations, we ate them
once a day. Every can of sea rations we had was made
in 1947. 1947?
It must have tasted lovely. Well, it's canned, you
know. Well, how come you only got fed once a day?
It's just the only time we ate was once a day. Didn't
you get kind of hungry other times a little? Yeah,
you could find, I ate lots of monkey meat when I was
there. Monkey meat? What did that taste like?
Well, then it tasted pretty good. I don't know what
it tastes like now, but it tasted fairly good then.
So, but they ate lots of monkeys. And so you'd have a
Vietnamese guard to get you a monkey sandwich.
Well, when did they start, got it, long before
this, they're supposed to have had good meals
served on the bases. Well, we didn't have any chow
halls or anything. There's the, the... We did
later on. ...papaganda. that's put out before
this. They said you had that before that. Right.
Sometime before that. The field troops, the
combat troops that were mobile would come through
sometimes. Well, like anybody, the infantry or
whoever it was. And they would have cases of steaks
that they couldn't cook because they didn't stop
long enough to cook them. But they couldn't get
C-rations. And we could get all the C-rations we
wanted, but we couldn't buy a stake anywhere. So we
would trade. That made sense. Okay, what about
your commanding officers and the headquarters?
Because obviously it was the headquarters
command who you were, right? There was 7th Air
Force Headquarters there. Okay. Okay, what about
their eating? Do they eat the sea rations? You
don't know? Because General Westmoreland said
that the troops were being fed hot meals at the
bases. I don't have a very high opinion of General
Westmoreland either. Would you care to expand on
that a little bit? Well, I just, you know, General
Westmoreland was our commander. Everybody's
commander. But Westmoreland and his command was
lying to the United States about a lot of things
about Vietnam, as everybody knows by now. They do
know now, but they didn't have... You know, we
were... I remember in May of 1966, during
Operation Cedar Falls and Junction City, They had
over 5,000 casualties during that month. The
reason I know that is because all the bodies came
through in front of us. The choppers brought in the
bodies because they'd bring them in there and put
them in military caskets and sent them home. And so
we got all of the bodies in because we'd have to
Transport, they'd have to transport them
through. But they reported like, I don't remember
now, 100 or 200 casualties for that month. You mean
what General S. Moreland reported? Well, his
command. His command reported, well, as
commander, whatever they say is his
responsibility, I'm sure aware. You know, that
was one particular instance that stood out in my
mind because I remember that so well. One reason I
lost a good friend during that. during that time,
during those operations. But there was so many
that died and so few that was reported to the
people. But I knew, of course, that I had a fit, but I
knew we lost that many in that small town. Do you
think this was a deliberate cover-up on the part of
Westmoreland, or do you think it came from the
President of the United States? I don't know. I
think it was probably both, because my opinion of
Lyndon Johnson is not any higher than General
Westmoreland. And he was also the president while
I was in Vietnam. Yes, I know. And I was a
presidential guard for him when I came back to the
States. How did you feel about that? I'm going to
deviate just a moment since you brought that up and
ask you how you felt about that after you had been
there. I didn't feel good at all. That was a job that
was put upon me. I didn't volunteer for that.
Security police get all kinds of jobs like that.
So, you know, they had to have a high security
clearance and all that good stuff. No, I didn't
like it. You know, I did it like I was supposed to do
it, but I didn't like doing it. Were you supposed to
have gone to Vietnam and done something grand and
glorious over there? I don't know. I didn't see
him. You didn't see him. Do you know what fragging
is? No.
Okay. Do you have any views on why you think we lost
the war? I think we lost it because we pulled out. Do
you think we could have won it if we had stayed
there? Sure. I think we could have won it any time we
wanted to. Why did you make that statement? By
they, who are you saying? The politicians. It was
very political, no doubt about that. Why did you
think they didn't want to pull out? They pulled out
instead of letting us win, letting them win. Why
that we pulled out? Instead of winning the war. If
you think they could have won the war. Well, of
course, I feel like that, you know, they could have
won it before I ever went. Anytime they wanted to.
And, you know, you know that. We didn't use half of
the firepower that we had available. You know, we
didn't use that in Vietnam. Another thing, we
never had went for territorial gain in Vietnam. It
was all body count type stuff. So, you know, there
wasn't that type of war. I think any time that we had
wanted to. When I was there, most of the guys you
talked to wanted to fight. They wanted to go
through and go on and keep going until we swept the
country. And everybody wanted to do that, but you
couldn't do that. And I think that could have been
done in several months. Why couldn't you? Were you
not allowed to? No, I wasn't allowed. It wasn't
that kind of fighting. Most everybody was
assigned to a base. You went out on patrol. If you
were in a reconnaissance group or you were in a
combat infantry unit, you were sent out each day,
and you might go through the same area every day for
months. And you didn't report that, well, we went
four miles into the jungle today. You reported
body counts. Did that disturb you? Sure. Why?
Well, we weren't making any progress. In other
words, did you safely say that you felt like you
were spinning your wheels? Sure, yeah. Yeah, we
were. Take ceasefires, for instance. Nobody in
Vietnam wanted a ceasefire. American troops
didn't want ceasefires. We had a ceasefire for
Christmas. Nobody wanted that. Why not? Because
the North Vietnamese didn't honor ceasefires. So
you were just sitting there? Sure. What
happened... Everything you did before that time
that that ceasefire was called, you pushed them
back so far. Well, they'd call a ceasefire so we
couldn't do anything anymore but watch. We could
watch. Everybody wanted to watch the enemy or
whatever they were doing. So during that
ceasefire, nobody was supposed to move, do
anything. They would move all of their arms back
south again, and we'd watch them. convoys, miles
long, moving ammunition and artillery back into
the areas where we were. When you immediately,
after the ceasefire was over, we was going to get
our tails blown off. What you're saying is that the
ceasefire, it was supposed to be arrest and
recuperation or something like that, but you were
actually setting you up as sitting ducks? I think
they were doing it for the people in the United
States, not for us. to satisfy that, not to, you
know, it looked good on paper, in the news. You
know, Christmas ceasefire in Vietnam is a joke.
Did you, how much of the, what did you, how much did
you know about Vietnam and what was going on in
there? Just what I saw on TV. Which was what? Well,
you saw some...